Okay, we're talking to Sapphire.
Congratulations on this wonderful new book.
Thank you.
And I have to say, based on the interviews and profiles I've read of you, going into this book, I almost expected that I, as a white middle-aged male, was going to feel threatened or harmed.
Or blamed.
Or blamed, and I don't, and I think I will.
So is there this perception of this book you think that people have that's incorrect, or...?
Um... What's the perception?
Oh, you mean the kind of preconception that it's going to be an indictment?
Angry, confrontational, and even if you take it the next indictment.
Well, it's somewhat of the publicity and just sometimes just listing the
the facts without even any intention to create that type of perception.
You could think it was very angry, you could think it was a very blaming book, but that was not the intent.
And obviously, once it's read, there's not one person who
who is removed from Precious's condition, who's read the book, who feels indicted or blamed by it.
I was interviewed by six children from the Children's Express, but they were all very different children from backgrounds like Precious, and there were three African-American children.
I think one of the African-American children was biracial and the other was very
fair skin and the other could have been Naomi Campbell, a young Naomi Campbell.
And I asked them, you know, how they felt, you know, or did they feel blamed or did they feel distanced from the character?
And they all felt, you know, while they could recognize how different they were and how their lives were never going to be like that, but they felt an intense identification with her and they didn't feel
well, you know, kids don't feel in that guilty realm like adults do, but they didn't feel bad by the book.
You know, I mean, yeah, that was the word.
We didn't feel bad about it.
And I didn't write it to make people feel bad or to make people feel guilty.
I wrote it like, you know, like a window with a shade down at night, and you open up the shade and you can see.
That was, if I had an intent, it was something that you haven't been able to see before.
You can see.
Now, what's amazing is that I noticed in a few of the interviews, people say, well, has she modeled on someone's
Is she a unique individual?
And the fact is, tragically, there are probably thousands of girls like that, and probably thousands of little boys like that.
That is problematic for me, and I get tired of trying to explain and defend, although I realize when you bring something to the world, it becomes your job to explain and defend.
But it really bothers me that, number one, people think that it's overkill, that this is not happening, that this is fantasy.
Yeah, exactly, exactly.
And what do you think the young people who are suffering like that feel?
So here I am, a victim of...
family abuse of, you know, educational system doesn't deal with me.
And this child is relatively lucky in some ways.
She's not involved in drugs, so she's not in the criminal justice system.
There's a lot about her that is, you know, I could have made a real, you know, a real horror story, you know, so there's a lot of redemptive things in her.
And yeah, that's what happens.
I mean, HRV doesn't just happen to
some people it happens to the best of people and you know just like it happens to some of the best gay white men it happens to some of the best uh young african-american women children and i was trying to show that yeah that's exactly right so um yeah and also i was trying to show with the hiv thing what it seems to me the hiv community and also the um
living with cancer community, and just a lot of communities are saying that life is not over.
Life is certainly compromised oppression, so we really get the feeling that life is not over.
It's not over, but actually I see this in a way, and maybe you'll disagree, but I see this in an extraordinary way as almost a triumphant book.
Because let me tell you, I've written my own book, and I'm working on another one now, and I'm
obsessed with books and reading and literacy.
And for me, the most, I may even use this in the book I'm working right now because I'm going to have a major chapter on literacy as we approach the 20 and the next millennium.
And this girl learning to read, which I've never seen the way you do it, the sounds and the letters, and the teacher interpreting what she's saying and writing back.
That's how we taught it.
I'm getting goosebumps now as I, and, uh,
This is almost a triumph, and for her, to discover that she can communicate through this medium almost is, I think you used the word triumphant in a way, but it is uplifting in a very finely focused way.
It is triumphant, and it is, to me, it is the one thing...
that crosses her over the line from victim to survivor.
And one of the books that really, really influenced me when I was growing up, I read it over and over again, was The Diary of Anne Frank.
And that, so here, of course, Anne Frank was a highly literate child, and, you know, parents were followers of merchants, but still, and intellectuals, so these were well-read people.
But still, it was, for her, not the act of reading, but the act of writing, that we have her, that she is not just another serial number who died.
And there's something, to me, in this story, the fact that Precious not only can...
learns to read, but is, you know, decode, but is also now able to encode, you know, to say her story, that means that those notebooks will be there, those journals will be there, whether they're there for Abdul to look back to see who his mother was, or, you know, for Ms.
Rain to keep, or whoever, whosever hands they fall into, she is a survivor.
And the other thing, I've been reading a book on a
It's interesting, it's not even a long book, but it's taken me over a year to deal with it because I have to keep putting it down.
It was part of what was on my mind while I was writing Push, a book on the survivors of Hiroshima.
These were three writers who were writing about their experience.
Do you remember the book?
It's named Hiroshima, which brings us to titles.
I'm sure the sky is still alive.
I'm going to write him a letter about this.
You've got to come up with a better title.
That was on my mind.
Then I was in school as I was working on this and thinking about this.
Part of my last semester's work, I did a paper on Dorothy Wordsworth, the kind of invisible sister of William Wordsworth, but also the journal.
She kept a journal.
You know, Virginia Woolf once wrote a piece about Shakespeare had a sister.
Exactly.
Wordsworth had a sister.
And she wrote...
On June 12th, for instance, she would write The Green Benches.
On June 14th, the words were, ah, I see The Green Benches.
And who becomes the genius that we all know about?
But, you know, this whole thing of women and silence, and then you think of... Did you read Jean Spokes' book on Alice James?
No, I haven't.
Henry and William's
Alice Jane, and of course this would blow this woman nuts.
You must read it.
I will, I will.
I'll write it now for you.
Okay, I will, thank you.
You should read it.
So that invisibility and coming into visibility through writing and precious feeling, you know, in that it's interesting that when the culture defines you as outside of it, even though you are
intensely visible so in the book we can see that Precious is someone who people might even stare at she's still invisible you know what I mean so there's a way that all of all of everything comes together through through language for her and being able to to she that we don't really see her uh arrive at a point where she redefines her reality and you know has a feminist awakening I mean we see her come almost like a
animal out of a hole into light, you know what I mean, and into a sense of her own humanity and self-worth.
So tell me if you like, just to switch gears slightly, about hearing this girl's strong voice.
Is it a real voice for you?
It was a... And also do you visualize it?
Yeah, yeah.
It was more than...
What's your last name?
It was not only her voice, and also she had, of course, the physicality, but often when I write, or like when a lot of us write, you know, you write from the outside, you're taught to write from the outside, you know, your physical description, the character,
But at some point early on, because the outside of her was so overwhelming, and I realized as close as I was to her, you know, with the same race, the same sex, I was so far away from this character I was seeing that I would fall into the trap of describing her in a way that I wasn't going to be happy with, you know, in a way that the culture describes her.
So I started to write from inside of her, like I was in her, like I was feeling, like I'm 45, but I was feeling her body like I was a teenager, you know, like in her...
You know, how different you are when you're young.
You know, your hormones are period.
How you smell.
I could smell her.
I could feel her.
You know what I mean?
You know, I tried to, instead of creating, I often sketch, you know, like an apartment scheme or room scheme.
Instead of doing that this time, I just was in her and tried to see her room.
and have her describe her bedroom.
So it comes out her thing as opposed to, if I was describing it, I might get into kind of like in the end where I have Jermaine talking, she talks about the physical condition of the house, the polyester sheets or whatever.
We don't go there with pressure because that's not how she would describe her stuff, her wall picture and stuff like that.
So for me, I was writing from the inside in a way I have
never done before, don't know if I'll do again.
I would think one of the hardest things in the world for a Christian writer is to write as a child.
through the voice of the child.
I mean, Shakespeare could do it.
All of his children, the little geniuses.
Little, little, little.
Well, remember that, what was it?
Was it the homunculus theory?
Remember that one that the child was really a little man within the, so it fits with the time.
That they sprung, they're just there, and they just get larger, but there's no feet at all.
I remember trying to write a children's book, as a matter of fact, and boy,
You never want to write down, but by the same time, you certainly want to communicate with them.
Your experience teaching, you lived, and I'm not asking you questions that are obvious about your name and the family, but I'm going to assume that what I've read is accurate.
Right, right.
There's no need for us to cover that.
To go over it again, yeah, no, that's fine.
Where was I going?
Teaching.
But you did, you lived in Harlem for 10 years.
Right, right.
And that's important.
Yeah, yeah.
You didn't just kind of go through like Bill Clinton and spend a day there.
No, no, no.
I lived there.
I lived in one, the building where I actually, you know, where she says 4-4 Lenox Avenue is a made-up number, but I actually lived in the building that I, in my mind, placed her in.
And I graduated from City College in Harlem in 1983.
That was a mistake.
Exactly.
So in 1983, I get my B.A., B.F.A.
And City College is right across the hill.
So at that time, it was just like a little cheap apartment.
I get it.
But I stayed there 10 years.
And in that time, the young people...
I move in and the kids who are 6 and 7 are 17 by the time I move out.
And I'm watching this generation of kids have babies.
You know, kids who I knew were bright and stuff, go to jail, you know, one, fatality.
I'm seeing all that.
And I'm the neighbor, and I'm also the, it's also one of those buildings where when you, I remember I would water my plants, and if I over,
over watered on it would be like that you know like they could the water would be downstairs within two minutes so you know I could hear everything hear everything you know uh and then also I'm teaching so I'm seeing not my kids in the building but I'm also seeing um the kids in the classroom so that's very different from your teacher who you can only imagine the home life you know so I'm seeing it and then I'm seeing
what happens in the classroom, you know what I mean?
And it's devastating to me.
And the teaching that you're doing, is it like the teaching?
Exactly, exactly.
So that school really existed.
You know, there is no 19th floor of the Hotel Teresa.
It stops at the 12th floor.
I figured, you know, I have to save myself some kind of way.
But yeah, yeah, so it stops at the 12th floor.
Yeah, that's exactly where he stayed.
And...
Also, you know, it would, how, you know, metaphorically, how dramatic would it be?
Up, up, up to the 12th floor.
You know, so, but I did teach at a, that would be what we call a community-based organization, a community-based literacy program, which is funded by the government, but is not attached to the Board of Ed or the CUNY system.
And I taught there.
That was my first literacy job.
And then I left there and went to...
the Bronx Community College, which was part of a CUNY Research Foundation literacy program.
I taught there five years.
And then when I went back to school, graduate school, Brooklyn College, they also had a literacy program, and I taught there.
So this was something I did for seven years, and I taught various different populations.
So I had what they call youth groups, 16 to 22.
Terrible.
It's the worst thing you can do, I think, to isolate youth.
And the best classes were ones, kind of like Precious's class, where you integrate young people in with adults.
And, you know, kind of the adults pull them up or, you know, something.
It works better.
You know, I really believe in that now.
This age, integration, race, and everything, it works better when people are, when there's a lot of differences within the class.
Is there this feeling of triumph for a teacher when you actually get a child?
Exactly.
Well, to me, I felt this, you know, that was, when that happened, it was like this, there's like this hidden world of great things, you know, that no one ever writes about, you know, like the first time I saw a baby, I thought, a baby born, I thought I was going to faint.
I was thinking how many, I've never really seen that a lot in literature, but this act of, you know, the first, I mean, I would have students
And she wasn't even, this type of student wasn't even the most dramatic.
I had students like from Ghana, you know, working class or peasant class Africans who I showed how to hold a pen, you know, stuff like that.
And when you just see that and you just see people, that moment where it happens, you know, and for someone like Precious, the courage.
So it didn't take a lot of courage for the African students.
I had some from, you know, from South American stuff, you know, that kind of,
You can make it if you try, we're in America now.
But for someone like Precious, a victim of repeated failure, to break out and to come into language, it was just like, this is good as, you know, graduate from Harvard.
You know, this is just as good.
And if life is about moving up, we really need to look at and congratulate
you know that that she went from here to here and that's just as good as you know me going from high school to graduate school you know what i mean it took took even maybe more effort you know what i mean but you did it i mean i just feel like that and also i wanted to give something back to my community you know i just i just feel like literacy teachers have never got to feel proud of what they do or had a place to
to talk about it and stuff like that, you know, and even I was, so I was a published writer and stuff, and I would go places and everybody would be talking about their goddamn poetry workshop, you know, all their college students and all that, and my students got published, or, you know, so, and I, and I really didn't have a, I just had never seen what I was experiencing and living in print, so that was part of it, too.
I wanted to show, not just, I could have just had pressure to go through her
her abuse and her survival, but I wanted to show what happens in the classroom, and also the magic of it, that learning is magic, you know, it's fun, you know, and that it's part of what life is about.
Now, do you foresee, I mean, clearly she's not going to live a long life.
Right, right, right, right.
Well, we know now that there are gay men who are much older than her who are diagnosed, who are now living
10, 12, and 15 years after diagnosis.
So the fact that black women after diagnosis are only living sometimes three years has to do with class and poverty.
So we'll look at Precious right now at 18 who has no pre-existing conditions.
And you're talking about a gay man at 30 who may have already had syphilis or other things or, you know, a lot of them, the first...
hepatitis, these things, an already impaired immune system, older.
Why should she not live?
Why should she, you know, my dream would be that she would get the health services and the educational services to remain symptom-free for another 10 years.
Then we're talking about Abdul possibly not having to enter foster care until he had a
psychic development that could withstand the abuse that's going to happen in foster care.
So if she could stay with that boy until he's 12, keep reading to him, let him, even if he does become a so-called AIDS orphan, know that someone loved him deeply as opposed to he was some type of
outcasts still you know I mean how these kids feel they walk around in shame they feel almost like they're from a leopard colony yeah yeah and this big secret your mother dies at age and all that stuff so that that is possible if it's possible for it's possible it's possible and his father is his grandfather and uh and of course that would be
the first thing that would be told to him in foster care.
He would find that out.
They'd find that out.
It would be on his file.
Just like what's on her file comes to her.
The social worker has told her that I won't put down your HIV positive on your file.
Of course everything goes on your file.
We're living in that type of
But in your mind, do you see writing about her again?
I don't think so.
I really, really wanted to raise the question, not answer it.
You know, I really wanted to leave people with that, okay, here's who you're talking about and pointing your finger at.
And we know, I told one, this is primarily African American audience, we know what's going to happen to her if that halfway house closes down, if the school closes down, which it is, now the school is gone, if...
if Harlem Hospital had closed down, we can imagine, we know what's going to happen.
If we don't work, if we don't do the things necessary to see that the social services we have remain intact, and also our, you know, obviously, you know, the book is not trying to Pollyanna social services.
We see the mother doesn't need them.
You know, we see that they've been much abused and that they need an overhaul, but if they're just taken from people, if people are punished,
You know, if we go into that Christian punitive thing, we're going to just take them away from you.
We know what's going to happen to her.
One week at the homeless shelter with TB-infected homeless people, you know, come on to her.
She couldn't deal with that.
So I wanted to show who were pulling the rug out from under.
Did you have a reader in mind when you were writing this?
I had a...
I had a lot of readers in mind, which is why I think the book is, you know, to me, even though it's a tiny little book, there's a lot of layers to it.
At the same time the book came out, you know, we really, it was in my contract, but we didn't know whether they would,
do it, you know what I mean, was for audio tape, but I kept, you know, I really wanted an audio tape, so there's this audio tape now, so I do it, so I'm reading the audio tape, and it got like this rave in Billboard magazine, yeah, all of it, yeah, it's slightly abridged, you know what I mean, but,
So I'm reading the audio tape.
It got like, Bill Boyd called it one of the audio tapes of the year.
So now this book is accessible to people who can't read.
So it will serve that population.
I also saw it as definitely reaching a highly literate population.
You know, I saw it as, I saw it too as a work of art.
This was another poem for me, another poem.
And I saw it as like my friends, my artists, other artists reading it.
And then, you know, and then I saw it as that
that whole group of people who are, she doesn't exist for reading it.
She, to me, is more invisible than, she would be invisible to Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man.
So imagine there are parts of the black population who don't see her.
You know, she does not exist for them.
So I saw those people as reading her.
But I really, and I also saw people like her, you know, reading about
their life and not having to feel ashamed.
I don't think if you were a young woman who had been faced with some of her challenges, you would read that book and come out feeling ashamed.
Have you encountered much hostility for people?
Not yet.
I have.
I'm sure African-American.
I had one African-American woman come out and tell me I was
It sounded like an anachronism from the 60s or something, but I was a tool of the white people.
It really kind of hurt my feelings.
I was a tool of the white people.
And that's the only reason that this book was being promoted, because it showed a dysfunctional view of the black family, which white people wanted to emphasize anyway.
And then I had...
You know, this guy in the Wall Street Journal wrote a really, you know, ugly piece, you know.
That's where it would appear.
Yeah, yeah, Wall Street Journal.
Here he is.
He lives, a black lawyer who lives in Vermont.
This is not how he sees black people.
Hey, you know, Vermont has the lowest number of black people per capita, you know what I mean?
And so I can, it's great that you don't see people like this.
I'm so glad I'm,
very glad and I'm in total agreement that two-thirds of black America are out of poverty.
I mean, I think that's a miracle, you know, given, you know, we're just 400 years down the line from, you know, picking cotton for free.
So two-thirds of us are out of poverty.
So that, to me, would mean renewed effort toward that one-third, not saying they don't exist.
You know, and that would mean
more of that good old colored, you know, each one teach one, you know, we have to raise them up and, you know, you know, pass the basket for sister so-and-so's or daughter with A's and all of that.
I mean, that's, it would mean that we would have some of that, I don't know what to call it, but not denial, not setting up saying this doesn't exist.
I mean, I mean, I think the mere fact that we do have caused these and, um,
that I did grow up with the green lawn and all that is more the reason that I should be interested in Precious.
Certainly if I was in the same condition as her, I would be trapped too.
I think it's very important to point out because I think a few people have suggested because you have acknowledged some
Parental abuse, yeah.
Parental abuse.
That is my story.
Perhaps that, you know, this is your story multiplied by ten, you know.
Right, right, right.
But it's not.
It's not.
And I think there's a psychiatrist, Judith Herman, who works with survivors of childhood sexual abuse.
And one thing she says is that you just reach this point.
I think it's true because I've been, you know, survivors that
Hiroshima, the Holocaust, everything, you reach this point, unless you've been totally devastated that you, it's like that quote in the beginning of the book from Wordsworth where he says, the man whose eye is ever on himself.
You start to turn to other people and you start to look at them and you realize what you've been through is not much, you know what I mean?
And that's, you know, compared to Precious, most of us haven't been through a lot and it just, at some point you just stop
you know, mulling your own past and you get to work with what's happening here, you know, what's happening now in America and not the 50s, the 60s, forever and ever, but what's happening to kids now.
And I understand that you really didn't consider yourself or even think of yourself as a fiction writer until... I was a poet.
I was a poet.
Right, right.
You are still a poet.
I'm still a poet.
And she was like my... Even though she is a nine...
book novelist she was head of the poetry department so i i came to her as a poet and she was you know going through my poetry and we were really working on poetry uh and but also i i think that she saw over and over and everybody did in the poetry a strong narrative being you know you know always story and story and i quite agree and when uh when i when i approached her you know i told i'm working on this
piece, you know, I didn't, you know, I couldn't even, I wouldn't even say story, I said this piece, this fiction piece, and then at some point, you know, she was so, you know, I think that's a good teacher, like the kids say, cool, you know, and at some point I asked her, well, you know, what is a novel, and she just said, Sapphire, it's 150 pages, and in my original notebook that I wrote that in, I have, I wrote in the front 150 pages, and I was free,
i didn't get into thinking i had to create this elaborate plot thing i didn't think oh i was gonna have to flash back to the mother's childhood it just it freed me and also i was in school so i i i was felt i could do what i want to do i could make mistakes i could take leaps and um and the other thing she did for me too was um she really encouraged me and i think that had to do with me being a woman
being, I think I was the oldest student in my class, the second oldest, to get out of, not to stay in La La Land, you know, 160 pages is a novel, and what you do with novels is you take them to the world.
You know what I mean?
They don't end up in your file cabinet.
And so it wasn't just that she helped me with the work, she sent me to people, editors, and told me you go talk to so-and-so at Crown Press and this and that.
And that was,
And the other thing, she's a very good woman.
She didn't just do this for me.
It just so happened she told me to do it, and I did it.
There were other people who she also tried to help.
She told me, go speak to so-and-so at such-and-such place.
And I called her, and I said, Susan, I'm going to talk to so-and-so at such-and-such place.
I'm so happy for you.
Yeah, it just happened.
People don't understand that people can suggest things, but you still have to do it.
And the book still has to be good.
This book would not be published by Knobbs.
I don't care if it was Saul Bellow who said, take a look at it.
Or if Norman Mailer sent them, you go see so-and-so, or if Saul Bellow sent you, go see so-and-so.
Or Tony Morrison, who would have extraordinary influence.
Exactly.
They still have to say, this is a very important book that should be published, it won't be published, and published well.
Boy, you couldn't go with a greater house than that.
Yeah.
No, no, I feel...
I feel really blessed.
So quickly, because I want to shoot a couple pictures before I take you back.
You're a poet, you're a teacher, and now you're a novelist.
Right.
Math.
And I'm certainly hopeful that this is not your... You're not going to be Harper Lee and only give us one novel.
No.
No, I think that this is a beginning for me.
You know what I mean?
And I feel really... It's interesting.
I really... I haven't paid any attention to the kind of...
um you know kind of a little jab you know but i've really listened to some of the what i think constructive criticism and i think it's yeah you know and i think oh now i know next time you know what i mean i'm sure i'm hopeful that you also oh yeah the work developing you're not going to continue to be writing in the voice of this exactly exactly exactly exactly and also i think that there is this way that um
You know, while I was there in Harlem, I really, I came there as an adult, and I was really aware this is, this is... You did, you entered the life.
Yes, yeah, this is Langston Hughes' world.
This is James Baldwin's world, but this is the world that James Baldwin left and went to Paris, you know, until he wrote about it, you know, in retrospect and from memory, and I'm writing about it as I see it.
But in a certain kind of way, it hasn't been written about since in a certain kind of way by a
by a writer whose work has gotten into the mainstream.
And I felt this 80s and 90s urban setting hasn't been seen through a woman's eyes.
Because Alice Walker, even though they were giving us contemporary work.
She is the unseen presence here, isn't she?
Yeah, she is.
Well, actually, she's a seen presence.
She's a seen presence.
And I keep thinking of it as if you listen to, like, rap records, like you might listen to Run DMC or something.
And in the background, it won't be a fade.
It'll be...
audible they'll have James Brown playing and you'll understand that they are playing off of James Brown that James Brown's voice is literally in their head as they create their work and that's in a way what I was trying to show I mean I could have removed all references but you know hey this is the record playing in my head this is my
Well, I think this book couldn't be if it weren't a Walker.
Exactly.
Tony Morrison.
Now, I've interviewed Dorothy West as well.
I mean, I should send you my piece on there.
Oh, wow.
It went all over the United States.
It was the best piece written.
I love that woman.
I don't know if you've ever met her.
She gave me an opinion.
I've interviewed Tony Morrison.
This book, your book couldn't exist without Walker and...
Dorothy, of course, is of a totally different generation.
She is from the Harlem Renaissance.
Right.
But I think you did need those books as a foundation.
Exactly.
There would be no push.
And also what I keep trying to tell people is Precious would have died without those books.
So the world that she...
comes into, Kekola Breedlove had to die.
The world that she comes into, by the time Precious is literate, she can get on a bus and come see a sign.
If your parents bother you, call this number.
Dave Dinkins had an incest survivors hotline.
By the time she knows
who to talk to, there are places to go.
I mean, could Cola Breedlove have gone to an Incest Survivors meeting?
Could that, could, in 1980-something, Bill Clinton, we had a meeting, this was therapists and writers and stuff.
Let's move over here, too.
I'm going to just shoot it.
You can actually sit down right here.
Bill Clinton sends a telegram to the meeting.
I'm sure it's his, you know what I mean.
But still, who was even acknowledging it when, um,
Sealy or Pecola Breedlove was alive, you know.
I have about 15 newspapers that take colored pictures.
About 25 of them.
Oh, that's great, though.
Okay.
You don't even have to stand up.
I'm very quick with the pictures.